---
Rating: 5
Start Date: 2026-01-11
End Date: 2026-01-26
Read Status: Completed
Format:
  - paper
Review:
Book: "[[Reading Tracker/Books/Mad Ship]]"
Re-Read: false
New Author: false
Library: false
---
I adored this book. It's now 5 days after finishing it that I'm writing this review and I'm in a bit of a rush, but I hope I can capture a lot of what I loved about it. First of all, this is the first book in a long time that had me gasping, smacking it in excitement, and giving me all the warm feelings that made me love reading as a kid. I had been so worried to read this book because Ship of Magic was my all time favourite and I was afraid the series would get worse—I was wrong. It's better!

For one, I never realized how much I wanted to learn about the Rain Wilds until Reyn’s POV was added. I *love* learning more about the Rain Wild city and the only complaint I have is that realizing that they’re pillaging the remains of the Elderling city for profit, to the degree of killing living creatures by turning them into liveships, hurts my heart and makes me feel guilty for wanting Vivacia and Ophelia to just continue as they are, feeling like living beings instead of dead husks of once-living creatures.

Also, I finally understand! The serpents were the worst part of Ship of Magic and while I knew they would have a greater part in the rest of the series, I never dreamed it would be as important as it is! They’re the through-stone to the once-living dragons, now preserved only in wood that was being *butchered* for liveships. And oh, what that means for the Paragon! I love Paragon, but it’s also a horrible thing to realize he was made of two planks—he is *two* ancient creatures, torn apart and put back together, with a much of Ludwick thrown in, taken over by pirates once, slaughter after slaughter where blood is memory—I can’t. Also, after what happened to Kendry(?) the Ship, I’m afraid for all the liveships. I feel selfish for wanting things to “go back to normal” when I realize now that their whole everything has been thrown away and it would be more right for them to be entirely free of their families. 

Alright, trying to go back to the other characters. I like Kennit a lot more! He’s probably still my least favourite character (more by default than because I don’t like him now), but it really feels like something happened when Vivacia and Wintrow saved his life that day. Wintrow gave something of himself to Kennit and Kennit shared something with Wintrow, and as a consequence, Kennit is no longer a singular selfish figure the way he felt in the first book. There’s something of a kindness and empathy for at least Wintrow and likely Vivacia, and while he is still a bastard, he is one I can engage with now. The objective good that his actions are doing is really interesting as a counterbalance to his general disposition, and I can see why Wintrow would believe that serving him is Sa’s goal. 

I still love Althea and Brashen as well. Seeing Brashen become Captain Trell seems amazing and I’m really hoping he and Paragon can continue to sail (though I’m debating whether its ethical to continue sailing these ships anymore, as tragic as *that* is. Unless, of course, the liveship in question would rather stay a ship than share their memories and give up on this lower lease of life than they’d had before. Oops. Back to Brashen. I’m proud of him for trying to quit cindin and I think he came into power very naturally, which makes sense for someone who had been First Mate for so long. And while I was Team Grag for a minute (more to support the Vestrit family than for the actual life Althea could have had with him), I really appreciate the way that he lets her be independent even when it’s ridiculously difficult, like when she was attacked in the hold.

Althea I feel has grown the least of all POVs in this story, which makes sense, as she’d had the most growth in the previous. While she did try half-heartedly to help the Vestrits in the ways she didn’t love, at the end of the day, her goal is still singular: She wants the Vivacia. More than she wants to stay for her family. More than she wants to compromise on her sister’s inheritance. More than Brashen. More than Grag. Everything for the Vivacia. And honestly, I never stopped wanting that for her either (which is why realizing what they are, and how much *more* they are than family ships, worries me for the heartbreak that that reality may never come, not even contending with the fact that Vivacia is all-in on tackling slaveships with Kennit.

Andddd Malta. She was my love-to-hate-her character last book. I hated Kyle too and will never stop, but Malta was the “sweet-summer-child” of hatred. She was youthful and misguided in a way that felt so familiar to when I’d been her age and the world was so much smaller. She cared for so little other than pretty things and being popular and beloved and she was smart enough to play to her strengths to get as much of the world she wanted. And then her dad disappeared and she changed. Malta isn’t that little girl anymore. She’s a young woman who wants to support the Vestrit family, and while she still indulges in some childish fun, some longing and dreaming and wanting to be wanted, as anyone her age should, she’s tempered with responsibility that she’s now finally taking seriously, and I’m really starting to appreciate who she is growing into. And awh, Selden is growing up too!

I have to end this eventually, so let me just say that I don’t even want to *think* about how the fall of Bingtown and the rise of the dragon will influence the story. I’m excited and afraid and I really hope Ronica is okay.